# ProjectScheduleMakespanMinimizer

# What does the application do?

The project schedule makespan minimizer aims to solve a variant of the job-shop scheduling problem using a genetic algorithm. The focus of the project is only the algorithm that will schedule the tasks. The advantage of a genetic algorithm over other approaches is that the constraints of the project can be changed drastically, yet the fundamental principles of the algorithm remain robust. In a genetic algorithm, specific parameters can be changed, but also it can allow the use of different mutation, crossover, fitness, and selection functions, depending on the data. I hypothesize that this adaptability will enable efficient scheduling solutions for real-world projects, even in scenarios where standard approaches would fall short.

# What is the problem I aimed to solve?

The problem has many variations, but a general description of the job-shop scheduling problem can be as follows.

- The inputs for this are a list of jobs and a list of workers.

- Each job consists of a set of operations that need to be finished in a predefined sequence on certain resources, subject to several constraints.

- Each worker then can finish the job in a given amount of time that is specified in the input.

- The output of this problem is a schedule of the tasks, assigning tasks for each worker.

The solution can vary, depending on the objective function to be optimized, but it usually is a schedule showing the temporal assignment of operations of orders to the resources to be used. What is different in this project’s problem from the job-shop schedule is that the jobs have a more complex precedence order. Before, a job was a series of operations or tasks, but now the job is only a single task, and the precedence order from the task can extend to other jobs, not as self-contained as within a regular job-shop scheduling problem. This increases the complexity of the problem. Not only that, but the program will also allow the option for two or more workers to work on a single task, unlike the job-shop schedule problem, where there is only one worker per task. This can increase the size of the search space, depending on the input data. The job-shop scheduling problem is known to be NP-hard.

# How the algorithm works

The algorithm follows the basic concepts of a genetic algorithm, such as population initialization, evaluation (fitness function), selection, crossover, mutation, replacement, and termination.

- The most distinct step that made the difference between other genetic algorithms was the chromosome representation. A good chromosome representation manages to cover as much search space as possible while avoiding invalid individual generation, which was difficult as the set of tasks needed to satisfy the predecessor order. A good chromosome representation also allows the other functions of the algorithm to compute faster, avoiding unnecessary calculations. For this, I chose to represent the genes as a list of pairs of workers/job. This can't lead to the wrong individual as long as the pairs of workers/jobs are picked from the input. The issue with this approach was that the fitness function was hard to calculate in some situations where a worker had to choose between starting 2 or more jobs at the same time, as the choice could lead to different makespans. This meant I had to calculate all the possibilities before finding the best makespan. I have solved this issue by generating a new list that represents the priority of the jobs; the first jobs in the list will be started first, so the issue where a worker had to choose which job to start first was avoided as the choice was already made. Now the chromosome representation is a list of workers/job assignments, a list representing the job priority, and the fitness value to save computational costs. Still, the list for the job priority could lead to invalid individuals, as the precedence order must be respected. So I generated by abstracting the jobs with their precedence order to a graph with a new node. Start before any task was started, traverse it randomly, and add the jobs in the list in the order of the traversal.

- I created a new graph data structure to be able to traverse over the jobs in most functions.

- The fitness function was calculated by traversing the graph of the jobs in the order of the job priority list. Then I calculate for each job the finish time, considering when the workers become available to start the task.

- The mutation function works by choosing a random worker/job pair and substituting it with another from input. Still, the mutation wasn't complete if I didn't also mutate the job priority list to be able to explore the whole search space. I used a swap mutation for this part, but it can lead to invalid individuals, which I fixed by verifying and repairing the chromosome.

- For the crossover function, I used single-point crossover for both the list of workers/job pairs and the job priority list. The job priority list must be verified and repaired, the same as the mutation function.

- The selection function used was the rank-based selection.

# How to use and test the application

There are 2 ways to run the application. The first one is simply to download the dist folder and use the executable; the other is to run the main.py file. There are 2 example projects to be scheduled in the dist/main, and you can use one of them. The project makes use of CSV files to store the inputs, and the program comes with a basic CSV file editor. There you can edit the input in the project configuration, run the algorithm in the algorithm control tab, and see the result in the Gantt chart view.

# About this project
This project was developed as my individual final-yer project in B.Sc. Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science. It was designed and developed from scratch, focusing on solving a real-world variant of the NP-hard Job Shop Schedulling problem using an evolutionary algorithm.
